Processing:Creative Coding and Computational ArtIra GreenbergComplete Source Code:The source code directory contains all the code used within the book's examples, organized by chapter. The code is formatted as plain text (.txt)Chapters 2-14:The code organized within these directories is intended to be pasted into the Processing text editor window and run within the Processing environment.Appendix C:The Java code within Appendix C is intended to be run outside of the Processing environment.*Please note that many of the code files contained in the archive are in-process snippets, used for a specific step in a tutorial. Thus, not all of the code in the archive is intended to be run independently in its current state. In addition, there are numerous snippets that depend on other snippets to run. Data Directories:Some sketches require additional resources, such as fonts or images, to run. I have tried to clearly comment this information in the code, as well as within the text of the book. I have included many of these required resources in a data directory within each chapter directory. Not all the chapters include a data directory.Bugs:I have tried to ensure bug-free code. However, with a project of this scale, there is a possibility of a few pesky critters remaining. Here are a few things to try should you encounter an error when running one of the examples.¥ Do a search in the code for the characters: ~CCCThese characters were used in the preproduction stage of the book and should be removed.¥ Do a case sensitive search in the code for the keyword framerateThis keyword was switched to frameRate midway through writing the book. I am fairly certain I caught all of these, but you never know.¥ Use Processing version 0124. I debugged all the code examples of the book with this version.¥ Harder to track down bugThe book was edited using Microsoft Word's comment bubbles. During reformatting from the .doc to .txt format, bubble text gets appended to the file directly. I tried to remove all comment bubbles prior to converting the code. Again, it's possible I missed one. The bubble text will look something like the following: [CM1]Code works fine I really hope you enjoy the book (and don't find any bugs.)Ira