# ARTICLES

## [As Linguagens de Programação para as Artes - Metodologias de Ensino-Aprendizagem Adaptadas (Madalena Ribeiro)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/As%20Linguagens%20de%20Programa%C3%A7%C3%A3o%20para%20Artes%20(Madalena%20Ribeiro).pdf>)

_Resumo: Atualmente, as linguagens de programação são usadas por pessoas com formação em domínios cada vez mais diversos e distintos do habitual, tendo já chegado ao domínio das artes. A linguagem Processing, que tem um cariz visual e que possibilita o desenvolvimento de aplicações/performances com elementos visuais e sonoros, foi mesmo projetada para ser usada por artistas. Contudo, a preparação prévia e a sensibilidade do público-alvo desta linguagem, enquanto aprendizes, é bastante distinta da preparação dos alunos comuns de linguagem de programação. Por esse motivo, é aqui proposto um conjunto de metodologias de ensino/aprendizagem adaptadas, no sentido de criar entusiasmo na aprendizagem e atingir um êxito efetivo._

## [Contextualizing Generative Design (Saeed Arida)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Contextualizing%20Generative%20Design%20(Saeed%20Arida).pdf>)

_Abstract: Generative systems have been widely used to produce two- and three-dimensional constructs, in an attempt to escape from our preconceptions and pre-existing spatial language. The challenge is to use this mechanism in real-world architectural contexts in which complexity and constraints imposed by the design problem make it difficult to negotiate between the emergent output, the context, and the controllability desired by the human designer. This thesis investigates how generative systems address contextual parameters, including the designer, client, user, meaning, aesthetics, environment, and function. This is demonstrated through my case studies, in which my aim was to avoid computerized unprocessed formalism that does not implicitly allow for any contextual and cultural content. I sought to extend simple algorithmic form-generation processes to allow for the subtleties of a given context to be effectively addressed. Some challenges and questions arose from these case studies. By interrogating different generative machines, common threads and challenges, similar to mine encountered in the case studies, were found. All of the processes that strove towards the creation of a generative system struggled with similar issues: How can we use rule-based systems without sacrificing meaning or function or the humanistic touch? How can we address contextual parameters without a loss?_

## [Design Generativo - Estudo exploratório sobre o uso de programação no design (Anderson Koyama Vieira)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Design%20Generativo%20-%20Estudo%20sobre%20o%20uso%20de%20programa%C3%A7%C3%A3o%20no%20design%20(Anderson%20Vieira).pdf>)

_Resumo: Atualmente, o uso de novas tecnologias influencia diretamente o processo de criação do designer. A programação é uma destas ferramentas e vem sendo utilizada, por exemplo, em aplicações do design que tem sido chamadas de Design Paramétrico e Design Generativo. Assim sendo, o objetivo desse trabalho é realizar um estudo exploratório sobre a influência da programação no processo de design e em sua linguagem visual. Para atingir esse objetivo, foi levantado um histórico desta prática, traçado um panorama de projetos da atualidade e foram realizadas experimentações práticas que exploraram as possibilidades e potencialidades deste modo de fazer design na área visual. Estas explorações revelaram pontos importantes do processo de design que envolve a programação. Pontos esses que discutimos neste trabalho e que nos permitiram compreender melhor como se dá esta prática._

## [Generative design: a paradigm for design research (Jon McCormack, Alan Dorin, Troy Innocent)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Generative%20design%20a%20paradigm%20for%20design%20research%20(Jon%20McCormack).pdf>)

_Abstract: Generative design offers new modes of aesthetic experience based on the incorporation of system dynamics into the production of artifact and experience. In this paper, we review a number of processes that can be explored by designers and suggest how design as a discipline can benefit from this research. These processes include self-organization, swarm systems and ant colonies, evolution, and generative grammars. We give example applications of these processes to creativity and design._

## [Modern Programming for Generative Design (José António Branquinho de Oliveira Lopes)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Modern%20Programming%20For%20Generative%20Design%20(Jos%C3%A9%20Lopes).pdf>)

_Resumo: Cada vez mais arquitectos transitam dos processos tradicionais e das codificações arquitecturais clássicas para uma nova área chamada Desenho Generativo. Desenho Generativo (DG) é a aplicação de métodos computacionais na geração de objectos arquitecturais. Nesta área, designers escrevem programas que quando executados produzem modelos geométricos. Este movimento é claramente visível no mundo acadêmico, com a adopção de cadeiras de programação no currículo de arquitectura, e no mundo da indústria, com estúdios de arquitectura a substituir processos tradicionais por aplicações de computador. Consequentemente, arquitectos e designers precisam desesperadamente de um sistema moderno para DG._

## [Programming Languages for Generative design (António Leitão, Luís Santos)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Programming%20Languages%20for%20Generative%20Design%20(Ant%C3%B3nio%20Leit%C3%A3o).pdf>)

_Abstract: In this paper we compare visual and textual programming languages for generative design. We argue that, in the past, this comparison has been flawed and that it is now time to reconsider the potential of the textual programming paradigm but using modern programming languages and development environments specifically targeted to the generative design domain. We present VisualScheme as a prime example of such language and we compare it with the most used visual programming language in the generative design field._

## [Generative Design a new stage in the design process (Rita Fernandes)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Generative%20Design%20a%20new%20stage%20in%20the%20design%20process%20(Rita%20Fernandes).pdf>)

_Abstract: Design processes are characterized by change. Unfortunately, CAD tools are currently being used just as a more efficient version of the traditional paper-based approach, an approach that does not help the designers at handling change, particularly for the exploration of different solutions or to adapt the design to evolving requirements._

_Recently, new approaches have been introduced in the design process, which are better tailored for handling change. Generative Design is one of them and can be defined as the creation of shapes determined by algorithms._

_This dissertation argues for one main point: integrating Generative Design as a new stage in the design process dramatically simplifies the handling of changes. In particular, we propose an algorithmic approach to design that overcomes the limitations of the traditional approach for using CAD tools._

_Our approach requires the formalization of the design intents, for which we use programming. This approach has an initial cost. However, we argue that this cost is highly rewarding when the designers need to handle change, by allowing them to explore many different alternatives, quickly and effortlessly._

_To evaluate the proposed approach we developed a three-dimensional model of a case study, a large and complex building, using a purely programming-based representation._

## [Shape grammars and the generative specification of painting and sculpture (Stiny e Gips)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Shape%20grammars%20and%20the%20generative%20specification%20of%20painting%20and%20sculpture%20(Stiny%20e%20Gips).pdf>)

_Abstract: A method of shape generation using shape grammars which take shape as primitive and have shape-specific rules is presented. A formalism for the complete, generative specification of a class of non-representational, geometric paintings or sculptures is defined which has shape grammars as its structural component. Paintings are material representations of two-dimensional shapes gen~rated by shape grammars, sculptures of three-dimensional shapes. Implications for aesthetics and design theory in the visual arts are discussed. Aesthetics is considered in terms of specificational simplicity and visual complexity. In design based on generative specifications, the artist chooses structural and material relationships and then determines algorithmically the resulting works of art._

## [A Survey on Procedural Modeling for Virtual Worlds (Smelik)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/A%20Survey%20on%20Procedural%20Modeling%20for%20Virtual%20Worlds%20(Smelik).pdf>)

_Abstract: Procedural modeling deals with (semi-)automatic content generation by means of a program or procedure. Among other advantages, its data compression and the potential to generate a large variety of detailed content with reduced human intervention, have made procedural modeling attractive for creating virtual environments increasingly used in movies, games, and simulations. We survey procedural methods that are useful to generate features of virtual worlds, including terrains, vegetation, rivers, roads, buildings, and entire cities. In this survey, we focus particularly on the degree of intuitive control and of interactivity offered by each procedural method, because these properties are instrumental for their typical users: designers and artists. We identify the most promising research results that have been recently achieved, but we also realize that there is far from widespread acceptance of procedural methods among non-technical, creative professionals. We conclude by discussing some of the most important challenges of procedural modeling._

## [Creative Coding - Programming for Personal Expression (Peppler, Kafai)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Creative%20Coding%20-%20Programming%20for%20Personal%20Expression%20(Peppler%2C%20Kafai).pdf>)

_Abstract: Media Arts within primary and secondary education is a relatively new avenue of research. Within the context of the arts classroom, rarely is learning to program emphasized despite its importance for creative expression in a digital medium. We present outcomes from an extensive field study at a digital studio where youth accessed programming environments emphasizing graphic, music and video. Learning the language of creative coding is essential to expression in a digital medium — one with increasing importance for youth and society at large. Here, we argue that it’s not just in the viewing or playing of digital media but also in the constructive — or coding — experience through which connections to art can be established._

## [Procedural Modeling of Buildings (Pavel Reichl)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Procedural%20modeling%20of%20buildings%20(Pavel%20Reichl).pdf>)

_Abstract: This thesis describes theoretical basis of co-temporary techniques used for procedural modeling of buildings and thoroughly explains use of CGA shape grammars. An integral part of this thesis is a plug-in into a modeling tool Blender which demonstrates the usage and provides visual results of the CGA shape grammar technique._

## [Computer Implementation of Shape Grammars (James Gips)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Computer%20Implementation%20of%20Shape%20Grammars%20(James%20Gips).pdf>)

_Abstract: Just as there are symbolic thinkers, people who think mainly in terms of letters and numbers and other symbols, and visual thinkers, people who think primarily in terms of shapes and colors and spatial relationships, there can be symbolic computations and visual computations. Clearly, symbolic computations are much more extensively developed; digital computers are based on symbols. Shape grammars are intended to form a basis for purely visual computation. The primitives in shape grammars are shapes, rather than symbols. The relationships and operations are all spatial (e.g. similarity, rotation) rather than symbolic._

## [Instant Architecture (Peter Wonka)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Instant%20Architecture%20(Peter%20Wonka).pdf>)

_Abstract: This paper presents a new method for the automatic modeling of architecture. Building designs are derived using split grammars, a new type of parametric set grammar based on the concept of shape. The paper also introduces an attribute matching system and a separate control grammar, which offer the ßexibility required to model buildings using a large variety of different styles and design ideas. Through the adaptive nature of the design grammar used, the created building designs can either be generic or adhere closely to a speciÞed goal, depending on the amount of data available._

## [Computational Design I: Theory and Applications (MIT)](http://www.mit.edu/~tknight/IJDC/)

_Abstract: Shape grammars were invented over twenty-five years ago by Stiny and Gips. They were one of the earliest algorithmic systems for creating and understanding designs directly through computations with shapes, rather than indirectly through computations with text or symbols. Over the years, shape grammars have been explored through applications addressing a variety of design problems. The history of these applications in architecture and the arts is sketched in this paper. The roles of shape grammar applications in education and practice are outlined. New and ongoing issues concerning shape grammars in education and practice are discussed._

## [Procedural Urban Modeling in Practice (Watson)](<https://github.com/DanielBrito/generative-design/blob/master/Articles/Procedural%20Urban%20Modeling%20in%20Practice%20(Watson).pdf>)

_Abstract: Procedural modeling is finally going main stream. Until recently it was a boutique solution, used only when no other optionsexisted. Now procedural modeling is often the cost-effective solution, used because the alternatives are too expensive. In film, games, and other applications, consumers expect richer, higherquality digital content for their dollar. Because budgets won’t allow content producers to increase cost significantly, they have only one choice: they must improve their tools. Procedural modeling is the primary ingredient in these tools. One of the main drivers of these trends is urban content. Cities are huge, richly detailed artifacts often required in digital productions. Modeling them with existing, nonprocedural tools can take hundreds of man-years. Several researchers are creating procedural techniques specifically for automating city modeling._

## [What is Generative Art - Complexity Theory as a Context for Art Theory (Philip Galanter)]()

_In this paper an attempt is made to offer a definition of generative art that is inclusive and provides fertile ground for both technical and art theoretical development. First the use of systems is identified as a key element in generative art. Various ideas from complexity theory are then introduced. It is noted that systems exist on a continuum from the highly ordered to the highly disordered. Citing examples from information theory and complexity science, it is noted that highly ordered and highly disordered systems are typically viewed as simple, and complex systems exhibit both order and disorder. This leads to the adoption of effective complexity, order, and disorder as organizing principles in the comparison of various generative art systems. This inclusive view leads to the somewhat surprising observation that generative art is as old as art itself. A number of specific artists and studies are discussed within this systems and complexity theory influenced paradigm. Finally a number of art theoretical questions are introduced to exercise the suggested generative art definition and implicit paradigm._
